docs: install and running instance documentation (#2533)
sopel-irc/sopel: docs/source/run/service.rst

a service, placed at ``/etc/systemd/system/sopel.service``:

.. code-block:: systemd

    [Unit]
    Description=Sopel IRC bot
    Documentation=https://sopel.chat/
    After=network-online.target

    [Service]
    Type=simple
    User=sopel
    RuntimeDirectory=sopel
    StateDirectory=sopel
    LogsDirectory=sopel
    PIDFile=/run/sopel/sopel.pid
    ExecStart=/home/sopel/.local/bin/sopel start
    Restart=on-failure
    RestartPreventExitStatus=2
    RestartSec=30
    Environment=LC_ALL=en_US.UTF-8 SOPEL_CONFIG_DIR=/etc/sopel

    [Install]
    WantedBy=multi-user.target

.. __: https://systemd.io/

For this service to work you will need the following:

* to create a ``sopel`` user
* to install ``sopel`` with that user (or to change the path in the
  ``ExecStart``)
* to place your Sopel configuration file into ``/etc/sopel/default.cfg``, and
  to setup its access rights so that the ``sopel`` user can read and write it
* and to edit the ``[core]`` section of this configuration file to set the
  appropriate paths:

  .. code-block:: ini

      [core]
      homedir = /var/lib/sopel
      pid_dir = /run/sopel

>       logdir = /var/log/sopel

Reviewer: We should consider adding something like `-o core.homedir=...` to `sopel start`, so the service file can override some settings there instead of requiring a specific Sopel config to work correctly.

Reviewer 2: [Environment variables](https://sopel.chat/docs/cli#overriding-individual-settings) already allow this without needing to touch the CLI code.

Reviewer: Ah. I don't like the `.`/`_` thing, but I'm inclined to set those vars and not ask config changes then.

These paths are required for Sopel to know where to put its files (data, cache,
PID file, logs, etc.).

And with that, you will be able to start/stop your bot with
``systemctl start sopel`` and ``systemctl stop sopel``. Once you are sure it
works, you can enable the service with ``systemctl enable sopel`` so that
the service will start automatically at boot.

.. seealso::

    There is more to say about systemd, its service unit files, and the
    ``systemctl`` command. Be sure to read `systemd.unit's documentation`__ for
    more information.

.. __: https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/latest/systemd.unit.html

> Example of configuration for libera
> ===================================

Reviewer 2: Copying how Libera presents itself on its own site, this should be:

```suggestion
Example of configuration for Libera Chat
========================================
```

To put everything together, let's say you want to run a bot for your channel
on the `libera.chat network`__. For that, here is a configuration file you will
need to put at ``/etc/sopel/default.cfg``:

.. code-block:: ini

    [core]
    nick = <Your Bot Nick>
    host = irc.libera.chat
    port = 6697
    use_ssl = yes
    verify_ssl = yes
    owner = <Your Nick>
    channels =
        "#yourchannel"
    homedir = /var/lib/sopel
    pid_dir = /run/sopel
    logdir = /var/log/sopel

> Make sure to change ``<Your Bot Nick>`` by your bot's nick, as "Sopel" is
> already taken; and set your own's nick as the owner instead of ``<Your Nick>``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Make sure to replace ``<Your Bot Nick>`` with your bot's nick, as "Sopel" is
already taken; and set your own nick as the owner instead of ``<Your Nick>``.
```

Side note: Connecting to Libera with no `owner_account` set will make Sopel [nag the user about account matching](https://github.com/sopel-irc/sopel/blob/72493dcd4bd0b44d88a3a72f6c1948cfbd695ecd/sopel/coretasks.py#L399-L411) every time it starts, because Libera supports `account-tag`:

> This network supports using network services to identify you as my owner, rather than just matching your nickname. This is much more secure. If you'd like to do this, make sure you're logged in and reply with ".useserviceauth"

Author: Yes I know! That's how I usually set up my bot: I run it and let it ask me to use the command. 😁

Reviewer 2: That, um, definitely starts users early on learning that Sopel will clobber comments in the config file 😅

====================
Running as a service
====================

> Now that you can run the bot, you probably want it to run forever in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you have your bot set up, you will probably want it to run forever in the
```

====================
Running as a service
====================

Now that you can run the bot, you probably want it to run forever in the

> background of your system. While there are many ways to do so, there are few

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
background of your system. While there are many ways to do so, there are a few
```

steps and requirements that remain the same to properly run Sopel as a service.

Requirements to run a service
=============================

Sopel needs the following:

* a non-root user to run as

> * a read and write access to its configuration file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* read/write access to its configuration file
```

* a writable pid directory
  (:attr:`~sopel.config.core_section.CoreSection.pid_dir`)
* a writable logs directory
  (:attr:`~sopel.config.core_section.CoreSection.logdir`)
* a writable data directory
  (:attr:`~sopel.config.core_section.CoreSection.homedir`)

.. important::

>     Do **not** run Sopel as the **root** user. And avoid if possible to run

Reviewer: If this isn't already the case, sopel should probably just check this and quit. Better to enforce with code than docs.

Author: Without going into that debate: the code already does that, but this warning is less for the regular user, and more for anyone tempted to do something rather stupid. It is a warning to remind the reader that, hey, be careful out there, it's dangerous.

    with a privileged user.

Running with systemd
====================

> `systemd`__ is a service manager used by Debian and most Debian derivatives

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`systemd`__ is a service manager used by Debian and most Debian-derived
```

> `systemd`__ is a service manager used by Debian and most Debian-derived
> Linux distributions. Here is an example of a service unit file to run Sopel as

Reviewer 3: Nit: might as well refer to Ubuntu here since it's a soft default elsewhere in this changeset

```suggestion
`systemd`__ is a service manager used by Ubuntu and most Debian-derived
Linux distributions. Here is an example of a service unit file to run Sopel as
```

> a service, placed at ``/etc/systemd/system/sopel.service``:

Reviewer: This doc (not necessarily this line) should at minimum mention the possibility of running it as a user service, or just give the `enable-linger`, `~/.local/share/systemd/...`, `systemctl --user enable` instructions (though the service file may need tweaks for that).

Author: I'll let the reader do their own research on systemd. It is far more complex than what we can, or should for that matter, document here.

> .. code-block:: systemd

Reviewer: This should link to `contrib/sopel.service` and `contrib/sopel@.service`, not duplicate them.

Author: I think I'll remove them from contrib, that would be even better.

@dgw I feel like the contrib folder could be modified in another PR instead of this one, because @half-duplex is right about the issue of duplicating the same information.

Reviewer 2: @Exirel If you're moving stuff from `contrib` into the docs, it's fair to delete the source in the same PR so as to keep the change atomic.

Author: Alright that's fair! Thanks. :+1:

Reviewer: I disagree with removing it from contrib/.
- This results in having service files in two completely unrelated places to keep in sync
- The single-instance one is no longer easily available for packagers or scripts to use, which means more users and packagers will write their own, with varying quality

Reviewer 2: @half-duplex Please suggest the optimal outcome (in your opinion), then, given the concerns:

- Maintaining service files in multiple locations (in docs _and_ `contrib/`) _will_ lead to desyncs when one is inevitably forgotten while updating the other.
- The documentation should have the relevant information wholly contained within it, and not require following a link.

I share your concern about packagers/scripts losing access to templates; pointed out the same in my review note on `contrib/sopel.cfg`, though that also suffers from the desync possibility vs. examples in the docs as mentioned above.

Reviewer: To me, the least bad option by a good margin is to just link the files in `contrib/`. It's better to make the user click a link than to inevitably end up with something _incorrect_ in the docs.
Alternatively, does sphinx have a way to just embed the file?

Author: > The single-instance one is no longer easily available for packagers or scripts to use, which means more users and packagers will write their own, with varying quality

Why would we end up with something incorrect in the docs? Explain to me how is that going to happen if we have one and only one place for that information?

We don't maintain well the contrib directory, we overlooked it for most of the time. We put things in here that are mostly "do what you want with these, they are not part of our supported stuff, but sharing is cool so here it is". As a matter of fact, the single-instance unit was modified only 4 times in the last 8 years, including 2 changes unrelated to its quality: the version I rewrote is actually better now, following systemd's behavior and dedicated folders for logs, data, config, and run files (such as PID). From my perspective, it's *better* now in the doc than the version that was in contrib until now.

I'll move the multi-instance stuff into the doc, because I can get that it can be confusing to have two places for the same kind of information.

    [Unit]
    Description=Sopel IRC bot
    Documentation=https://sopel.chat/
    After=network-online.target

    [Service]
    Type=simple
    User=sopel
    RuntimeDirectory=sopel
    StateDirectory=sopel
    LogsDirectory=sopel
    PIDFile=/run/sopel/sopel.pid
    ExecStart=/home/sopel/.local/bin/sopel start
    Restart=on-failure
    RestartPreventExitStatus=2
    RestartSec=30
    Environment=LC_ALL=en_US.UTF-8 SOPEL_CONFIG_DIR=/etc/sopel

    [Install]
    WantedBy=multi-user.target

.. __: https://systemd.io/

For this service to work you will need the following:

* to create a ``sopel`` user
* to install ``sopel`` with that user (or to change the path in the
  ``ExecStart``)
* to place your Sopel configuration file into ``/etc/sopel/default.cfg``, and

>   to setup its access right so that the ``sopel`` user can read and write it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  to setup its access rights so that the ``sopel`` user can read and write it
```

* and to edit the ``[core]`` section of this configuration file to set the
  appropriate paths:

  .. code-block:: ini

      [core]
      homedir = /var/lib/sopel
      pid_dir = /run/sopel
      logdir = /var/log/sopel

> These path are required for Sopel to know where to put its files (data, cache,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These paths are required for Sopel to know where to put its files (data, cache,
```

PID file, logs, etc.).

And with that, you will be able to start/stop your bot with
``systemctl start sopel`` and ``systemctl stop sopel``. Once you are sure it
works, you can enable the service with ``systemctl enable sopel`` so that
the service will start automatically at boot.

.. seealso::

>     There are more to say about systemd, its service unit file, and the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    There is more to say about systemd, its service unit files, and the
```
